ready for review (#44)
rstudio/tensorflow-blog: _posts/2019-07-10-feature-columns/feature_columns.Rmd

description: > 
 TensorFlow feature columns provide useful functionality for preprocessing categorical data and chaining transformations like bucketization or feature crossing. From R, we use them in popular "recipes" style, creating and subsequently refining a feature specification. In this post, we show how using feature specs frees cognitive resources and lets you focus on what you really want to accomplish. What's more, because of its elegance, feature-spec code reads nice and is fun to write as well. 
author:
  - name: Daniel Falbel and Sigrid Keydana
    affiliation: RStudio
    affiliation_url: https://www.rstudio.com/
slug: falbelkeydana2019featurecols
date: 07-10-2019
bibliography: bibliography.bib
categories:
  - Keras
  - Introductions
output:
  distill::distill_article:
    self_contained: false
preview: images/feature_cols_hier.png
---

```{r setup, include=FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE)
```

It's 2019; no-one doubts the effectiveness of deep learning in computer vision. Or natural language processing. With "normal", Excel-style, a.k.a. _tabular_ data however, the situation is different. 

> Basically there are two cases: One, you have numeric data only. Then, creating the network is straightforward, and all will be about optimization and hyperparameter search. Two, you have a mix of numeric and categorical data, where categorical could be anything from ordered-numeric to symbolic (e.g., text). In this latter case, with categorical data entering the picture, there is an extremely nice idea you can make use of: _embed_ what are equidistant symbols into a high-dimensional, numeric representation. In that new representation, we can define a distance metric that allows us to make statements like "cycling is closer to running than to baseball", or "`r emo::ji("smiley")` is closer to `r emo::ji("joy")` than to `r emo::ji("angry")`". When not dealing with language data, this technique is referred to as _entity embeddings_ ^[see e.g. [Entity embeddings for fun and profit](https://blogs.rstudio.com/tensorflow/posts/2018-11-26-embeddings-fun-and-profit/)].

Author: actually I'd like to skip this because these should come across differently-weighted sort of, you know -- kinda just mentioning case 1 but stressing case 2

> Nice as this sounds, why don't we see it used all the time? Well, creating a Keras network that processes a mix of numeric and categorical data used to require a bit of an effort. With TensorFlow's new _feature columns_, usable from R through a combination of `tfdatasets` and `keras`, there is a much easier way to achieve this. What's more, `tfdatasets` follows the popular [recipes](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/recipes/index.html) idiom to initialize, refine and apply a feature specification `%>%`-style. And finally, there are ready-made steps for bucketizing a numeric column, or hashing it, or creating _crossed columns_ to capture interactions.

Author: will do!

In a second applied example, we demonstrate the use of _crossed columns_ on the _rugged_ dataset from Richard McElreath's _rethinking_ package. Here, we also direct attention to a few technical details that are worth knowing about. 

## Mixing numeric data and embeddings, the pre-feature-spec way

Our first example dataset is taken from Kaggle. Two years ago, Brazilian car insurance company Porto Seguro asked participants to predict [how likely it is a car owner will file a claim](https://www.kaggle.com/c/porto-seguro-safe-driver-prediction) based on a mix of characteristics collected during the previous year. The dataset is comparatively large -- there are ~ 600,000 rows in the training set, with 57 predictors. Among others, features are named so as to indicate the type of the data -- binary, categorical, or continuous/ordinal.
While it's common in competitions to try to reverse-engineer column meanings, here we just make use of the type of the data, and see how far that gets us.

> Concretely, this means we want to

Reviewer: @skeydan knows I have so many list-form feels. If the introduction is a partial sentence, it finishes with a colon. List agreement is perfect (hooray!), and lower-casing the items is totally legit. Because the first item is a complex phrase (it contains a comma of its own), I recommend using a semicolon as a delimiter.

> Concretely, this means we want to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Concretely, this means we want to:
```

> - use binary features just the way they are, as zeroes and ones,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- use binary features just the way they are, as zeroes and ones;
```

> - scale the remaining numeric features to mean 0 and variance 1, and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- scale the remaining numeric features to mean 0 and variance 1; and
```

> - embed the categorical variables (each one by itself).

Reviewer: Feel free to reject, but this could read as: embed each of the categorical variables

> We'll then define a dense network to predict `target`, the binary outcome. So first, let's see how we could get our data into shape, as well as build up the network, in a "manual", pre-feature-columns way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll then define a dense network to predict `target`, the binary outcome. First, let's see how we could get our data into shape, as well as build up the network, in a "manual", pre-feature-columns way.
```

Reviewer: Just axing multiple qualifiers a bit! 🙂

> When loading libraries, we already use the versions we'll need very soon: Tensorflow 2 (>= beta 1), and the development (= Github) versions of `tfdatasets` and `keras`:

Reviewer: > When loading libraries, we already use the versions we'll need very soon:

By "very soon" do you mean in this post? If so, I'd simplify this sentence to (see suggestion edit):

> When loading libraries, we already use the versions we'll need very soon: Tensorflow 2 (>= beta 1), and the development (= Github) versions of `tfdatasets` and `keras`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When loading libraries, we'll need specific versions: Tensorflow 2 (>= beta 1), and the development (= GitHub) versions of `tfdatasets` and `keras`:
```

Reviewer: If you reject this (totally fine) still give GitHub its initial caps!

```{r}
tensorflow::install_tensorflow(version = "2.0.0-beta1")

remotes::install_github("rstudio/tfdatasets")
remotes::install_github("rstudio/keras")

library(keras)
library(tfdatasets)
library(readr)
library(dplyr)
```

> In this first version of preparing the data, we make our lives easier by assigning different R types, based on what the features represent (categorical, binary, or numeric qualities): ^[Having mentioned, above, that these really may be continuous or ordinal, from now on we'll just call them numeric as we won't make further use of the distinction. However, fitting ordinal data with neural networks is definitely a topic that would deserve its own post.]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In preparing the data, we make our lives easier by assigning different R types, based on what the features represent (categorical, binary, or numeric qualities): ^[Having mentioned, above, that these really may be continuous or ordinal, from now on we'll just call them numeric as we won't make further use of the distinction. However, fitting ordinal data with neural networks is definitely a topic that would deserve its own post.]
```

$ ps_calc_09     <dbl> 1, 1, 2, 4, 2, 3, 3, 1, 4, 1, 4, 1, 1, 3, 3, 2,…
$ ps_calc_10     <dbl> 5, 7, 7, 2, 12, 8, 10, 13, 11, 11, 7, 8, 9, 8, …
$ ps_calc_11     <dbl> 9, 3, 4, 2, 3, 4, 3, 7, 4, 3, 6, 9, 6, 2, 4, 5,…
$ ps_calc_12     <dbl> 1, 1, 2, 2, 1, 2, 0, 1, 2, 5, 3, 2, 3, 0, 1, 2,…
$ ps_calc_13     <dbl> 5, 1, 7, 4, 1, 0, 0, 3, 1, 0, 3, 1, 3, 4, 3, 6,…
$ ps_calc_14     <dbl> 8, 9, 7, 9, 3, 9, 10, 6, 5, 6, 6, 10, 8, 3, 9, …
$ ps_calc_15_bin <int> 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0,…
$ ps_calc_16_bin <int> 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1,…
$ ps_calc_17_bin <int> 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1,…
$ ps_calc_18_bin <int> 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0,…
$ ps_calc_19_bin <int> 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1,…
$ ps_calc_20_bin <int> 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0,…
```

We split off 25% for validation.

```{r}
# train-test split
id_training <- sample.int(nrow(porto), size = 0.75*nrow(porto))

x_train <- porto[id_training,] %>% select(-target)
x_test <- porto[-id_training,] %>% select(-target)
y_train <- porto[id_training, "target"]
y_test <- porto[-id_training, "target"] 
```

> The only thing we want to do to the _data_ before defining the network is scaling the numeric features. Binary and categorical features can stay as is, with the minor correction that for the categorical ones, we'll actually pass the network the numeric representation of the factor data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The only thing we want to do to the _data_ before defining the network is to scale the numeric features. Binary and categorical features can stay as is, with the minor correction that for the categorical ones, we'll actually pass the network the numeric representation of the factor data.
```

Reviewer: (I hate weird conjugations in English, but, if you take out the middle, "The only thing we want to do to the data…is to scale the numeric features" makes more sense).

Here is the scaling.

```{r}
train_means <- colMeans(x_train[sapply(x_train, is.double)]) %>% unname()
train_sds <- apply(x_train[sapply(x_train, is.double)], 2, sd)  %>% unname()
train_sds[train_sds == 0] <- 0.000001

x_train[sapply(x_train, is.double)] <- sweep(
  x_train[sapply(x_train, is.double)],
  2,
  train_means
  ) %>%
  sweep(2, train_sds, "/")
x_test[sapply(x_test, is.double)] <- sweep(
  x_test[sapply(x_test, is.double)],
  2,
  train_means
  ) %>%
  sweep(2, train_sds, "/")
```

> When building the network, we need to specify the input and output dimensionalities for the embedding layers. Input dimensionality refers to the number of different symbols that "come in"; in NLP tasks this would be the vocabulary size while here, it's simply the number of values a variable can take. ^[In this dataset, every categorical variable is a column of singleton integers.] 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When building the network, we need to specify the input and output dimensionalities for the embedding layers. _Input dimensionality_ refers to the number of different symbols that "come in." In NLP tasks, this would be the vocabulary size while here, it's simply the number of values a variable can take. ^[In this dataset, every categorical variable is a column of singleton integers.] 
```

Reviewer: Or some form of emphasis when you give a nice, pithy definition!

> Output dimensionality, the capacity of the internal representation, can then be calculated based on some heuristic. Below, we'll follow a popular rule of thumb that takes the square root of the dimensionality of the input.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Output dimensionality_, the capacity of the internal representation, can then be calculated based on some heuristic. Below, we'll follow a popular rule of thumb that takes the square root of the dimensionality of the input.
```

> So as part one of the network, here we build up the embedding layers in a loop, each wired to the input layer that feeds it:

Reviewer: You can get rid of "here" and maybe even "so" (above), I think.

> So as part one of the network, here we build up the embedding layers in a loop, each wired to the input layer that feeds it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As part one of the network, we build up the embedding layers in a loop, each wired to the input layer that feeds it:
```

```{r}
# create a single input and a dense layer for the numeric data
quant_input <- layer_input(shape = 43)
  
quant_dense <- quant_input %>% layer_dense(units = 64)
```

Are parts assembled, we wire them together using `layer_concatenate`, and we're good to call `keras_model` to create the final graph.

```{r}
intermediate_layers <- list(embedding_layers, list(quant_dense)) %>% flatten()
inputs <- list(cat_inputs, list(quant_input)) %>% flatten()

l <- 0.25

output <- layer_concatenate(intermediate_layers) %>%
  layer_dense(units = 30, activation = "relu", kernel_regularizer = regularizer_l2(l)) %>%
  layer_dropout(rate = 0.25) %>%
  layer_dense(units = 10, activation = "relu", kernel_regularizer = regularizer_l2(l)) %>%
  layer_dropout(rate = 0.25) %>%
  layer_dense(units = 5, activation = "relu", kernel_regularizer = regularizer_l2(l)) %>%
  layer_dropout(rate = 0.25) %>%
  layer_dense(units = 1, activation = "sigmoid", kernel_regularizer = regularizer_l2(l))

model <- keras_model(inputs, output)
```

> Now, if you've actually read through the whole of this part, you may wish for an easier way to get to this point. So let's switch to feature specs for the rest of this post.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, if you've actually read through the whole of this part, you may wish for an easier way to get to this point. So, let's switch to feature specs for the rest of this post.
```

## Feature specs to the rescue

In spirit, the way feature specs are defined follows the example of the  [recipes package](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/recipes/index.html). (It won't make you hungry, though.)  You initialize a feature spec with the prediction target -- `feature_spec(target ~ .)`, and then use the `%>%` to tell it what to do with individual columns. "What to do" here signifies two things:

- First, how to "read in" the data. Are they numeric or categorical, and if categorical, what am I supposed to do with them? For example, should I treat all distinct symbols as distinct, resulting in, potentially, an enormous count of categories -- or should I constrain myself to a fixed number of entities? Or hash them, even? 
- Second, optional subsequent transformations. Numeric columns may be bucketized; categorical columns may be embedded. Or features could be combined to capture interaction.

> In this post, we demonstrate the use of a subset of `step_` functions. The vignettes on [Feature columns](https://tensorflow.rstudio.com/tools/tfdatasets/articles/feature_columns.html) and [Feature specs](https://tensorflow.rstudio.com/tools/tfdatasets/articles/feature_spec.html) illustrate additional functions and their application. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here we demonstrate the use of a subset of `step_` functions. The vignettes on [Feature columns](https://tensorflow.rstudio.com/tools/tfdatasets/articles/feature_columns.html) and [Feature specs](https://tensorflow.rstudio.com/tools/tfdatasets/articles/feature_spec.html) illustrate additional functions and their application. 
```

Reviewer: Trying to limit the number of references to the post a bit, here.

> Starting from the beginning again, here is the complete code for data read-in and train-test split in the feature spec version. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting from the beginning again, here is the complete code for data read-in and train-test split in the feature-spec version. 
```

Reviewer: 🤓 compound modifier!

```{r}
library(keras)
library(tfdatasets)
library(readr)
library(dplyr)

path <- "train.csv"

porto <- read_csv(path)

porto <- porto %>%
  mutate_at(vars(ends_with("cat")), as.character)

id_training <- sample.int(nrow(porto), size = 0.75*nrow(porto))
training <- porto[id_training,]
testing <- porto[-id_training,]
```

> Data-prep-wise, recall what our goals are: leave alone if binary; scale if numeric; embed if categorical.

Reviewer: Mention variables in this sentence? (Assuming that's what you're referring to).

Specifying all of this does not need more than a few lines of code:

```{r}
ft_spec <- training %>%
  select(-id) %>%
  feature_spec(target ~ .) %>%
  step_numeric_column(ends_with("bin")) %>%
  step_numeric_column(-ends_with("bin"),
                      -ends_with("cat"),
                      normalizer_fn = scaler_standard()
                      ) %>%
  step_categorical_column_with_vocabulary_list(ends_with("cat")) %>%
  step_embedding_column(ends_with("cat"),
                        dimension = function(vocab_size) as.integer(sqrt(vocab_size) + 1)
                        ) %>%
  fit()
```

> Note how here we are passing in the training set, and just like with `recipes`, we won't need to repeat any of the steps for the validation set. Scaling is taken care of by `scaler_standard()`, an optional transformation function passed in to `step_numeric_column`.

Reviewer: Is there a function reference for `scaler_standard()` somewhere? If so, link to it here!

> Categorical columns are meant to make use of the complete vocabulary ^[as indicated by leaving out the optional `vocabulary_list`] and pipe their outputs into embedding layers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Categorical columns are make use of the complete vocabulary ^[as indicated by leaving out the optional `vocabulary_list`], and pipe their outputs into embedding layers.
```

> Now, what actually happened when we called `fit`? A lot -- for us; as we got rid of a ton of manual preparation. For TensorFlow, nothing really -- it just came to know about a few pieces in the graph we'll ask it to construct.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, what actually happened when we called `fit()`? A lot -- for us, as we got rid of a ton of manual preparation. For TensorFlow, nothing really -- it just came to know about a few pieces in the graph we'll ask it to construct.
```

But wait, -- don't we still have to build up that graph ourselves, connecting and concatenating layers?

> Concretely, above, we had to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Concretely, above, we had to:
```

Reviewer: When you say above, are you referring to the earlier method, or above with this method?

- create the correct number of input layers, of correct shape; and
- wire them to their matching embedding layers, of correct dimensionality.

So here comes the real magic, and it has two steps.

> First, creating the input layers is as easy as calling `layer_input_from_dataset`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, we easily create the input layers by calling `layer_input_from_dataset`:
```

  gamma = 0.2
  p     = 3

  difference = tf$zeros_like(pos * neg) + pos - neg - gamma

  masked = tf$boolean_mask(difference, difference < 0.0)

  tf$reduce_sum(tf$pow(-masked, p))
}

model %>%
  compile(
    loss = roc_auc_score,
    optimizer = optimizer_adam(),
    metrics = list(auc, gini)
  )

model %>%
  fit(
    x = training,
    y = training$target,
    epochs = 50,
    validation_data = list(testing, testing$target),
    batch_size = 512
  )

predictions <- predict(model, testing)
Metrics::auc(testing$target, predictions)
```

After 50 epochs, we achieve an AUC of 0.64 on the validation set, or equivalently, a Gini coefficient of 0.27. Not a bad result for a simple fully connected network!

We've seen how using feature columns automates away a number of steps in setting up the network, so we can spend more time on actually tuning it. This is most impressively demonstrated on a dataset like this, with more than a handful categorical columns. However, to explain a bit more what to pay attention to when using feature columns, it's better to choose a smaller example where we can easily do some peeking around.

> Let's move on the second application. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: hm, not seeing the "green" alternative here, adding the "the" in manually...

With this diagram, the simple rule is: _We always need to end up with something that inherits from `DenseColumn`_. So:

- `step_numeric_column`, `step_indicator_column`, and `step_embedding_column` are standalone;
- `step_bucketized_column` is, too, however categorical it "feels"; and
- all `step_categorical_column_[...]`, as well as `step_crossed_column`, need to be transformed using one the _dense_ column types.

```{r, eval=TRUE, echo=FALSE, layout="l-body-outset", fig.cap = "For use with Keras, all features need to end up inheriting from DenseColumn somehow."}
knitr::include_graphics("images/feature_cols_hier.png")
```

Thus, we can fix the situation like so:

```{r}
ft_spec <- training %>%
  feature_spec(log_gdp ~ .) %>%
  step_numeric_column(rugged) %>%
  step_categorical_column_with_identity(africa, num_buckets = 2) %>%
  step_indicator_column(africa) %>%
  fit()
```

and now `ft_spec$dense_features()` will show us

```
$rugged
NumericColumn(key='rugged', shape=(1,), default_value=None, dtype=tf.float32, normalizer_fn=None)

$indicator_africa
IndicatorColumn(categorical_column=IdentityCategoricalColumn(key='africa', number_buckets=2.0, default_value=None))

```

> Now, what we really wanted to do is capture the interaction between ruggedness and continent. To this end, we first _bucketize_ `rugged`, and then cross it with -- already binary -- `africa`. As per the rules, we finally transform into an _indicator_ column:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What we really wanted to do is capture the interaction between ruggedness and continent. To this end, we first _bucketize_ `rugged`, and then cross it with -- already binary -- `africa`. As per the rules, we finally transform into an _indicator_ column:
```

To demonstrate the use of `step_crossed_column` to capture interactions, we make use of the `rugged` dataset from Richard McElreath's _rethinking_ package.

> We want to predict log GDP based on terrain ruggedness, for a number of countries (170, to be precise). However, the effect of ruggedness is different in as opposed to other continents. Citing from _Statistical Rethinking_

Author: I think here the word "Africa" got lost somehow?

Reviewer 2: Oops, sorry! Made the changes from the GitHUB ui, fixing :P
